5.4.2 Animal Responses
---

* a) discuss why animals need to respond to their environment;
	* One of the main characteristics of living organisms is that they are able to respond to both internal and external changes.
	* All organisms need a method of communication between their sensors and effectors.
	* Animals need to be able coordinate a vast numbers of responses if they are to escape predation and to live long to to procreate.

* b) outline the organisation of the nervous system in terms of central and peripheral systems in humans;
	* Coordinates the actions of a body through electrical impulses
	* Works in conjunction with the endocrine system
	* It is split up by structure and function
	* Central Nervous System
		* Consists of the brain and spinal cord
		* Made up of grey matter (non-myelinated cells) and white matter (myelinated cells)
	* The Peripheral Nervous System
		* It is made up of thousands of neurones that carry impulses to and from the CNS.
		* Sensory and motor systems of the PNS
			* Sensor neurones carry impulses from receptors to the CNS.
			* Motor neurones carry impulses from the CNS to the effectors.
				* Two types of motor neurones:
					* Somatic - Carry impulses from CNS to skeletal muscles which are voluntary muscles
					* Autonomic - Carry impulses from the CNS to cardiac muscle, smooth muscle in the gut and wall and gland, which are not under voluntary control 
			* Many neurones are bundled into connective tissue to form nerves.

* c) outline the organisation and roles of the autonomic nervous system;
	* The autonomic nervous is self governing and responsible for a lot of the homeostatic mechanisms but it can also deal with heightened responses such as stress.
	* Most autonomic neurones are non-myelinated whilst most somatic neurones are myelinated.
	* Autonomic connections to the effectors contain at least two neurones connected at a ganglion.
	* Two types of autonomic neurones.
		* Sympathetic
		* Parasympathetic
	* These are both antagonistic as the action of the neurones is directly opposite to the action of the other.

| Parasympathetic        | Sympathetic           |
| :-------------: |:-------------:|
| Relaxation Pathway | Stress Pathway (Best way to remember is that Sympathetic and Stress both start with an S) |
| Linked with a ganglion within the target tissue hence vary in length | linked at a ganglion out the spinal cord hence very short. (Best way to remember is that Sympathetic and Short both start with an S) |
| Effects include decreased heart rate, pupil contrition, decreased ventilation, and sexual arousal | increased heart rate, pupil dilation, increased ventilation, and orgasm |


* d) describe, with the aid of diagrams, the gross structure of the human brain, and outline the functions of the cerebrum, cerebellum, medulla oblongata and hypothalamus;

* e) describe the role of the brain and nervous system in the co-ordination of muscular movement;

* f) describe how co-ordinated movement requires the action of skeletal muscles about joints, with reference to the movement of the elbow joint;
. 

* g) explain, with the aid of diagrams and photographs, the sliding filament model of muscular contraction;

* h) outline the role of ATP in muscular contraction, and how the supply of ATP is maintained in muscles;

* i) compare and contrast the action of synapses and neuromuscular junctions;

* j) outline the structural and functional differences between voluntary, involuntary and cardiac muscle;

* k) state that responses to environmental stimuli in mammals are co-ordinated by nervous and endocrine systems;

* l) explain how, in mammals, the 'fight or flight' response to environmental stimuli is co-ordinated by the nervous and endocrine systems.